You have a body with senses; you live in an environment with which you have contact; that contact produces pleasant, unpleasant and neutral feelings. Right there is where you work.

The End of Rebirth

Based on a talk given given at Amaravati in 1996.

In Buddhism we speak of two levels of contemplation. The first is the conventional level of “me,” as a person, and “you,” as a person. For example, there is “Viradhammo” – fifty-ish, quickly getting out of shape, has duties, is a senior monk at Amaravati; his Mom is in Canada, and he has a little scar on his head with three stitches. That is “me,” as a person. There is the sense here of a person, of social responsibility, of a position in society, of the age of the body and of its genetic and cultural make-up. This is the packaged sense of self that a typical person works with, which is quite valid.

At this level, the teachings are about morality, right livelihood, responsibility for the environment, social action, expression and creativity. This is one level we operate on, where we can find all kinds of fulfilment; it is a very rewarding thing to be able to work, to express and create something.

However, it is not liberating, because things change. We really notice that it is not liberating when someone criticizes what we are doing. You might think you are doing a great job but when someone pokes a few holes in it, then you see how unliberating it is – how bound one can be to it.

If all we are trying to do is to find fulfilment on the level of family, social action and creativity, then of course our hearts are never fully appeased, because those conditions are always changing and they depend on so many other factors which are beyond our control. If my whole sense of fulfilment is my family, but then my kids leave home, or someone dies, or my child comes home with a red Mohican hairstyle – what do I do if my whole life is dependent on that?! So we would say that fulfilment on this level is not where liberation lies; it is not a refuge, although that is not to put it down.

The second level is the Dhamma level, the level of liberation of the heart. When we develop a Buddhist life-style, we can see how our families and our social positions can actually be our “monasteries.” They are the situations in which we practise inner vigilance and contemplation. Whether you are an artist, a doctor, a photographer or unemployed, that is your monastery, that is the place where you practise.

I was in New Zealand for nine years and was involved with a very beautiful monastery building project. During that time there was the necessity to function on the social level – I had to work and to organize things – but, through all that, the most important issues to consider were suffering and non-suffering: the inner world.

We built this lovely meditation hall (half my monastic life has been spent on building sites!). One whole side of it was open, and we had doors that were ten feet by ten feet – pretty big doors! However, the joiner who was making the doors was not very efficient. He would always tell us that the doors were coming next week, and this went on for four months! On the worldly level, we had to say to him, “Hey, listen! We have a contract, you are not meeting your responsibilities.” But on the inner level, we all had to take responsibility for our annoyance at this joiner. So both levels were operating.

This meditation hall is convertible. There is a cloister at the front, onto which these huge doors open. On top of the cloister we had a marquee custom-made so that we could double the size of the hall on big occasions. We got the best tentmaker in New Zealand to make this marquee, but it was faulty. We had to take tough steps to ensure he didn’t rip us off, but we still could not hate him. Sometimes we wanted to. The mind was saying, “What a rip-off! What are we paying this man all this money for?”

Our practice was right there. The tentmaker was our monastery. So without denying the necessity and the challenge of living in the world, we also recognize the inner world. If we view those two worlds skilfully we find a balance between conventional reality and the inner work. Then the tentmaker becomes a person with whom I learn to stand up for what is right, rather than putting my tail between my legs and running away. He helps me learn to be patient, clear and assertive.

This inner world is what we work with on a retreat. Although we should not forget the conventional world, we remember that Buddhism is not just a weird experience called retreat! We cannot spend our life on a retreat; we have to live in the world. The gift of a retreat though, is that we don’t have to do so much social reorganizing. If the toast is burned, it’s burned; we don’t sue the cooks. So we work with whatever we have, and we have the freedom to observe. A retreat offers the opportunity to look at suffering and non-suffering. The hub of the wheel is the centre of knowing and being; the stillness of being. This is where the unconditioned lies.

Maybe in your own lives you have difficulties to deal with – mortgages or recalcitrant teenagers? Don’t try to solve those problems now! Instead, I suggest you work with that very feeling of anxiety or worry as a present condition. This is the skill of moving from the conventional, social level of “me” as a person, to the impersonal level of basic Dhamma elements. This level of the teaching then breaks down our conscious experience to fundamentals which we can look at, no matter what our social situation is.

For example, thought – mental activity – is one of the fundamental things we have been looking at. If this activity is always kept on the personal level, it’s, “Well, what am I going to do tomorrow? I don’t know. . . . We need to do this, but what if we do that? Yes, let’s try this, then we’ll do that. . . .” All that is on the personal level – but on the Dhamma level this is simply planning, worry, thought.

If we remain on the personal level, there will always be this to-ing and fro-ing – struggling. It is only on that impersonal level of consciousness that we can understand not-self – anatta. It’s not that life itself is impersonal – we still have our individual kamma – but it is on this level that we can penetrate to a liberating understanding, by going beyond ignorance. We are not going to avoid the tentmakers and the joiners altogether; life is always going to be that way.

There are many teachings that can help us – for example, the Four Noble Truths or Dependent Origination (paticca-samuppada). We might feel overwhelmed if we try to figure these out, but in time we come to see that it’s a really beautiful package, intellectually very lovely.

More than that, these teachings encourage us to look in the right place, and show us the path to freedom. They take us away from the personal situation with the joiner or the tentmaker, directly to a fundamental sense of what stress is. So we develop the ability to examine on this level all the time. If I can look at the annoyance I feel towards the joiner and take it out of the personal realm by simply looking at it as stress, then I will be able to understand any annoyance I may have for the rest of my life and know how to deal with it.

Last night we talked about craving (tanha), the sense of wanting: wanting to become, wanting to get rid of, or simply wanting something essentially nice. Craving is a fundamental human characteristic, neither right nor wrong, just part of the package. The three kinds of tanha – bhava tanha, vibhava tanha and kama tanha – should be understood.

Bhava tanha is the craving for being. Notice when we are on retreat how much we are being something or someone? Sometimes there is a feeling of being kidnapped by the memory; we find ourselves back in time. Or maybe it is a future possibility. In thought, there is the sense of being a person, of becoming, through anticipation and expectation. If we are not aware of that, then our attention will be preoccupied, kidnapped by a constant level of stress in the mind. Then there is vibhava tanha, which is a repression. We have a lot of ideals about what we should not be and what we should not have. Vibhava tanha is the desire to get rid of those things.

Kama tanha is the craving for sense pleasure. Around the body there is a lot of kama tanha. We like comfort in this body; we don’t like arthritis or pain. Yet one of the lessons in this life, for some seemingly cruel reason, is that we need to witness to bodily pain. That is part of life. So, on the social level, we deal with the pain. We find some Chinese herbs or get the acupuncturist to poke us, whatever we have faith in; we work on that level. But, on the Dhamma level, we reflect: there is sickness. Why is there sickness? Because there is birth. That is just the way it is, like it or not. So sickness is something which needs to be learned about, as is pain.

On a retreat you get pain. I hope you don’t get too sick or pained, but you will probably feel some pain – in the knees or the back, or somewhere. So there is pain, and there is craving for comfort. That is a basic, fundamental instinct which needs to be understood.

Now if one can understand the craving for non-pain and be at peace with pain, then one obviously has done oneself a great service. So try to use the feeling of pain to examine craving, to understand the wanting and see the end of wanting. The same holds true for the emotions and the way sense-consciousness works.

The Buddha encouraged us to consider how human consciousness and the human body are involved with pleasant, unpleasant and neutral feelings and sensations; to use feeling (vedana) as a framework for contemplation or investigation. When you are thirsty, you drink a glass of orange juice. It is pleasant. When you are sitting here and your knees hurt, that is unpleasant. That is very obvious. So no matter what you are finding pleasant or unpleasant – the body, the weather, a person, or the content of your mind – notice the feeling of pleasant-unpleasant-neutral and then consider these feelings in relation to the arising of attraction-repulsion-neutrality.

When we are not in touch with Dhamma we often don’t consider these fundamental states of mind. We just enjoy the pleasant and try to minimize the unpleasant, which seems like a logical thing to do. But then that keeps us very restless because no matter how hard we try to do this, there will always be pleasant, unpleasant and neutral. Sense-consciousness is this way.

Seeking the pleasant, trying to be rid of the unpleasant is samsara. The more we do this, the more we want to do it, and the more we have to do it. We become addicted to this way of operating. We get into this very restless phenomenon called rebirth – becoming, doing, all the time. And this takes us away from our real home. This takes us away from the unconditioned, because pleasure and pain are always conditioned. As they change, we feel the need to change. As we grasp pleasure and pain, we find ourselves being spun around the samsaric wheel.

The wheel is one of our traditional images. The rim of the wheel represents sense experience – the contacts we experience, pleasant and unpleasant – all of it spinning around. Grasping the rim of a wheel simply swings us around with the general momentum.

So grasping the pleasant, then trying to hold onto it and being afraid of losing it; we make tremendous effort to keep it going. Getting angry at the unpleasant. In both cases we continue to spin around endlessly.

But the hub of the wheel is the centre of knowing and being, and this point of stillness can contain it all. This is where the unconditioned lies. If we can summon awareness and be that still centre of knowing, there are still comings and goings – but we have a refuge. This is what Ajahn Chah called “our real home.”

This is the basic structure that the Buddha asks us to look at. Our sensitive body contacts objects. That contact produces pleasant, unpleasant, neutral feelings (vedana). From there comes craving (tanha), the grasping of craving (upadana), and the whole process of becoming (bhava) and rebirth (jati). If one carries on like this over time, it becomes a habit. It is then very difficult to return to the still centre of being, because one is so restlessly engaged with that which moves, with the emotions and the thoughts.

Why are we kidnapped so much? Even though we sit here determining, “I will not get kidnapped!”, it’s very hard, isn’t it? Don’t think you are alone in this. We are all in the same boat! It is very difficult because of our habits, our conditioning. Even though we might have really good intentions, situations arise where we feel anger or fear.

What we are trying to do is to break up all these kammic patterns. The way to do this is by beginning to look at Dhamma, rather than remaining stuck on the level of personality. The contemplation of feelings (vedanupassana) is one of the Four Foundations of Mindfulness.

It requires careful attention to notice this basic structure of the way that some things attract our attention, while others repel us. We can try it with an emotion, with a bodily feeling, with a thought – or with people. On this retreat maybe you experience difficulty with another person, or maybe you fall in love with someone. Notice how some people are physically very attractive, while some are not. Some people have a lot of charisma, and others don’t. Notice how you are attracted or repelled. Look at that very simple movement of the heart. This is where our habitual emotions are really arising from.

Sometimes when you are sitting, the mind is bored, the eyes look around, and you find yourself attracted to someone... ah!... and then you start to create. Romance. There is the creation of “me” and “that person,” and what “we” are going to do, what is going to happen to “us” – sometimes this is called a “vipassana marriage” – and then, unexpectedly, the bell rings!

It can happen with hatred too – for example when there is something unappealing about someone. Rather than just noticing our desire to pull away from them, sitting with that until it reaches neutrality – we become very critical, caught in aversion, and try to push them away. But in contemplation of feelings, we can simply bring up an image of a person and be mindful of the attraction or aversion. That takes us to peace of the mind, to neutrality, rather than identification with the feeling itself.

If you can know that movement of feelings and learn to not follow or react, then you begin not to suffer. For example, your own psyche, the things you don’t like about yourself, the emotions you think should not be there – all these come up as very unpleasant. So ask yourself, “What does an unpleasant emotion feel like?”

Or in meditation you might sometimes experience tranquillity, bliss or bright lights, or notice how beautiful silence is, how really attractive that is… but then comes the coarse sound of an earth-moving machine! So we attach to the pleasant and the refined, and we try to get rid of the ugly. But what is it that knows pleasant and unpleasant?

Quite often we are so caught up with the craving for pleasure that we don’t even notice neutrality, which we find boring. As Ajahn Chah said, the neutral, the ordinary, is like the space between the end of the out-breath and the beginning of the in-breath. It is very calming but we don’t tend to notice it, because we want excitement; we seek to react to interesting, difficult or frightening things.

The practice of vedanupassana requires refined attention: taking this theme for contemplation in order to break down the whole self-structure. So no matter what you may be as a self, as a person, suggest to yourself that today you are going to simply try to notice attraction and repulsion in the mind. That way you are contemplating Dhamma, instead of just being a person. Then ask, “What is it that knows that which I am noticing?” That knowing is where we find our freedom. The structure is very analytical – but in Buddhism we need a certain amount of analysis.

You have a body with senses; you live in an environment with which you have contact; that contact produces pleasant, unpleasant and neutral feelings. Right there is where you work. Then you have tanha: wanting the pleasant, not wanting the unpleasant or the sleepiness and delusion around the neutrality. When that wanting arises, there might be grasping of it, believing in it. You really think that if you follow it you will be truly happy, or that to get rid of it will be the right thing to do.

So there is belief in the wanting, and the grasping (upadana). From the grasping comes the sense of becoming. One gets involved in this whole process and is reborn into the new situation. From there emerges the sense of dissatisfaction, and you get lost in that: “Oh, here I go again!”

Notice how “birth” and “death” operate moment by moment. I am bored with meditation, knees hurting and so I want to get up and do something interesting. Suddenly a creative idea that is really going to help the world pops into my mind. Rather than simply noticing this as an idea with a pleasant feeling, I want to stay interested – so craving and involvement keep the idea fermenting in my mind. From the boredom my attention gets “reborn” into pleasant or exciting thoughts. Eventually the pleasant thoughts get boring and so the cycle goes on and on. Each arising of a “birth” means there must eventually be a “death.”

It is important to notice the point where the mind moves to yet another interesting topic – for this is where we have a choice. If I can see the craving to get away from the boredom and in turn not grasp the clever and seemingly important ideas, then the mind settles down into silence and the cycle of “rebirth” has been abandoned. If, however, I choose to grasp the pleasant idea as a way of escaping the boredom then the mind stays busy with many little cycles of “birth” and “death.”

Disillusionment, disappointment and boredom bring us into the same kind of cyclic thinking. That is why it is important to notice these as states of mind and be patient until they subside of their own accord. In this way we develop mindful forbearance and that is what brings us to the peace of non-becoming.

So we choose. Sometimes we are able to notice the movement towards pleasure and we can say to ourselves, “Is this necessary? Will it lead to peace?” We don’t just react heedlessly to the feelings of boredom and disappointment. Our choices are based upon wisdom rather than ignorance. In a very immediate way we can realize the ending of the restless cycles of discontent in our inner world. We are then walking on the path of peace and the end of rebirth.