Glossary of Terms

Pali is the scriptural language of the Theravada tradition and several Pali words (printed in italics) are used throughout the book. This glossary defines some of those words.

Ajahn: Teacher. A Thai term. From the Pali “acariya.”

anapanasati: Mindfulness of in-and out-breathing. A core meditation technique for mental concentration.

anatta: Non-self, impersonality. Absence of any personal essence. The central Buddhist doctrine.

anicca: Impermanent, inconstant – the nature of all experiential phenomena.

Bhante: Venerable Sir.

bhavana: Mental development, cultivation.

bhikkhu: Monk.

dana: Almsgiving, liberality, generosity. A virtue practised to counter greed and egoism.

dhammavicaya: Investigation of the natural Law (dhamma).

dukkha: Pain, suffering, stress. It may be physical or mental. The term is quite broad and includes: pain; the suffering due to change and instability; and the unsatisfactoriness or unreliability of all formations.

Four Noble Truths: The most concise synthesis of the Buddhist teaching: Suffering, its cause, its end, the Path to the end.

khandhas: Groups, heaps, aggregates (of clinging). Five aspects summarising physical and mental experience. Rupa (form), vedana (feeling), sañña (perception), sankhara (formations), viññana (consciousness).

kamma: (skt. karma) (intentional) Action (of body, speech and mind). These actions ripen as result (vipaka).

magga: Path. The last of the Four Noble Truths. Right: view (understanding), thought, bodily action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, concentration.

metta: Loving-kindness. One of the four Sublime Abodes.

nirodha: Ending, cessation (of the cause of suffering). The Third Noble Truth. See “Nibbana.”

Nibbana: (skt. nirvana) Extinction, cessation, unbinding, liberation (of the passions; greed, aversion, delusion). The ultimate goal of Buddhist aspirations.

parajika: Defeat. Four rules for monks requiring disrobal if any one is transgressed. The monk is “defeated.”

pañña: Wisdom, knowledge.

precepts: Moral (or renunciate) standards. The basic five are to refrain from: killing, stealing, sensual indulgence, wrong speech and intoxication.

refuges: Buddha (Enlightenment), Dhamma (Truth), Sangha (community). These are sometimes referred to as the “Three Jewels” or the “Triple Gem.”

samudaya: Arising, origin (of suffering). The Second Noble truth. Opposite of “nirodha.”

samsara: The repeated “Round of Rebirth” – birth, growth, aging and death – that chains beings to existance. Literally: perpetual wandering.

sankhara: Fabrication, formation. Referring both to the volitional activity of “forming” things, and the things formed. As the fourth khandha it is primarily mental.

sukha: Pleasant, happy, joyful. One of the three kinds of feelings. Opposite of “dukkha.”

tanha: Craving, desire (literally “thirst”); the cause of suffering, as defined in the Four Noble Truths.

Theravada: The Southern School. (literally “The Way of the Elders.”) Generally found in S.E. Asia. and Sri Lanka.

vipassana: Insight, intuitive wisdom. Penetration (of Truth).